[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: "Men
are from Mars, Women
are from Venus" is arguably
the best-selling relationship
book of all time,
with 50 million copies
in print 100 countries
and 45 languages,
and still going strong.
It's been listed as one of
the most influential books
of the last quarter century.
And John Gray is with us today.
He's appeared on "Oprah" and
"Larry King Live" and CNN,
among many other shows,
for the past 40 years.
In his new book,
"Beyond Mars and Venus,"
John explains why being a man
or a woman in today's society
is more complex than ever.
Thank you for joining us.
>>JOHN GRAY: I am so
happy to be with you.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
There are so many questions
that go along with relationships
today.
What has changed since you
wrote the book in the '90s?
>>GRAY: Well,
actually it started
happening I think in the '60s.
Because I grew up in
the '60s, a teenager.
I grew out my hair like a girl.
I had bell-bottom pants, boots.
I demonstrated for peace.
What was happening?
I was liberated from being just
a traditional male to moving
onto my more loving self,
my more feminine self,
becoming whole.
And as I shifted from masculine
to feminine, it was ecstatic.
Meanwhile, all the
women were shifting
from being traditional women
to being empowerment groups.
We're going to be
heads of corporations.
We want to this power.
>>LISA: Rosie the Riveter.
>>GRAY: Make a difference,
become President, all that.
So they're experiencing
the ecstasy of release
from this limitation
of being on one side.
Spirit released us.
Now we can connect with
our true self, which
is both masculine feminine.
And so as you become
more close to wholeness,
you feel fantastic.
That's where the
creativity comes,
that's where power comes,
that's where love comes,
that's where lasting
passion comes,
when you have both
masculine and feminine.
However, we have
physical bodies and we
have to honor-- if
I have a male body,
I have to make sure I stay
grounded in my masculine body.
And women have to be grounded
in their female hormones.
Actually, very hormonal.
The whole thing is hormonal.
Male hormones, female
hormones, and if I go too far
to the female side, then
I become angry, irritable,
depressed, and I waste time.
For women, if they go
too far to the male side,
they're very
confident, powerful,
but they can't sleep at night,
or they can't fall in love.
They can't relax.
So busy, busy, busy.
So these are symptoms
of imbalance.
So by understanding
it's a good thing,
we've got a whole new set of
problems and relationships.
By understanding
this, relationships
can help us find that balance.
>>LISA: So because we have
a different level of growth
now-- we are more
evolved as a human race
about different things
around consciousness--
our environment, morality.
It's definitely an increasing
level of consciousness
that we're in.
Do you think that this has
affected relationships?
>>GRAY: Of course.
Even all of our
emotional issues--
so many emotional
issues people have,
go to therapists and all that.
That's actually a step
in the right direction
because now we have
more self-reflection.
Instead of just being
numb to what's going on
and unconsciously acting out
patterns of drama in our lives,
we can reflect.
We can step back and look
at what's going on inside.
And where I see the key factor
is in our relationships.
You can't hide from yourself.
Your partner is going to push
every button inside of you.
When you're out of
balance, it's going
to show up in your relationship
more than anything.
>>LISA: Isn't that true?
Yes.
>>GRAY: Yeah, and
so what we do is
we have to learn, OK, what
are the symptoms of being
out of balance?
How do I come back into balance
and what does that look like,
and what does that mean, and
what are the benefits of that?
And quite simply,
what I can say,
after 33 years of
marriage, the benefits
of learning to continually
use your relationships--
primarily intimate,
but all relationships--
to come back into balance, in
your intimate relationships,
you can experience
lasting, romantic passion.
That is a possibility.
Younger generation
today says, I don't
know if it's a possibility.
It just goes, it
goes, and it goes.
>>LISA: And younger people
are waiting longer and longer
to get married.
>>GRAY: Well, what happens
is that they get together
and the passion goes away.
They're friends,
they like each other.
They don't even have to have
a lot of reasons sometimes.
But it just-- the juice
isn't there, so they move on
and move on.
And why the juice isn't there,
why that attraction isn't
there, that's what we can
learn by learning new skills,
how to create that lasting
love, that lasting connection.
And what's interesting is
if you go back 50 years,
people didn't really care
if the passion went away.
That was normal.
Go back hundreds
of years, people
didn't even know what
passion was, basically.
And often women will say to me--
>>LISA: Really?
>>GRAY: Yeah.
Romeo and Juliet, OK, passion.
Because they died the day
after they got married.
It was standard policy that you
lose attraction to your partner
after a while.
When you got married, it
was always, does he make--
you know, you look at
the basic characteristics
for survival and security.
But once we're able to
provide that for ourselves,
our needs shift to
wanting a higher
level of emotional fulfillment,
which then shifts into a higher
level of self-actualization.
And people who want
passionate marriages, that's
called self-actualization.
That's bringing
forth the genius.
Because historically,
nobody ever
had lasting passion in marriage,
or it was extremely rare.
>>LISA: Kings and queens had
separate bedrooms and, yeah,
I mean--
>>GRAY: Oh, there was nothing
going on between them.
That's a-- you know, King
Arthur and Guinevere--
it was Lancelot.
And of course, that
was short-lived.
>>LISA: Exactly.
>>GRAY: It's always
the unavailable guy
that has the passion.
It doesn't last.
But you can make it last.
And here's the dynamic.
People say, why does it go away?
Well, when there's newness,
it stimulates a brain chemical
called dopamine.
Dopamine gives you
passion, excitement.
Oh, you just went somewhere new.
You get excited.
And then you see the
same thing over and over,
you get used to it.
Familiarity kills passion.
So you always can
find familiarity--
I mean, newness in
a new relationship.
That's going to go away.
>>LISA: That's easy.
>>GRAY: You get to
that nice comfort zone.
OK, comfort zone is good too.
So how do you keep the passion?
Polarity.
When you recognize that
women and men are different,
and women can connect with the
essence of their femininity,
men can connect to the
essence of their masculinity,
they always want to connect.
Polarity can create
passion for a lifetime
if you're able to maintain it.
But if you give up who you
are, your authentic self,
to make a relationship
work, it goes flat.
You have a comfortable
relationship.
>>LISA: How do you
add stress into that,
when you have double-income
families and aging
parents and young children?
That's a catastrophe.
>>GRAY: It is a catastrophe.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And let's look at it
from another point of view.
We create stress in our
life by choices we make.
Take a little bit--
come back to responsibility.
For example, our
expectations of perfection,
expectations of doing
everything the right way.
>>LISA: That's so true, yes.
>>GRAY: That is us creating
a drama in our life.
And often, you
know, many women--
we did one study on women--
wives whose husbands
did wash the dishes.
And they complained that
the men did it so poorly
they had to wash them again.
OK.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Of course, that's
why the men don't do it.
Because they're going
to get yelled at.
>>GRAY: There's a part
of that to be true.
There's a lot of stuff
that comes along with that.
We haven't seen our
fathers doing dishes.
We didn't see our
We didn't really learn how.
We don't get a lot of
acknowledgment for that.
Men are always driven
by what is going
to get the most acknowledgment
because we know,
even today, deep down inside,
if you don't perform well
in the world--
making money is the
way it looks now.
If you don't have some skill
or task that's admirable and--
>>LISA: It's a reward.
>>GRAY: --to get the
reward and the reward
is a woman will love you.
And ultimately, deeper down,
this is politically incorrect,
but it's true, deeper
down, she'll love you
and she'll take off her
clothes and have sex with you.
That is the ultimate for men.
>>LISA: That's the root.
>>GRAY: It's the root of it.
It's in our primitive brain
is that women turn us on.
Women motivate men.
And the most-- see, a
woman doesn't get naked
with just anybody.
You have to be special.
You have to be important.
You have to be number one.
You have to earn that.
So when a woman
opens up like that,
it just makes a man feel
like a million bucks.
>>LISA: Well, in
the primitive brain,
though, that happened,
then procreation happened,
and more children
happened, and it
strengthened the community
and the society and so forth.
So it was a true reward in,
maybe, if you look back--
>>GRAY: For
survival, absolutely.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: The instinctive
brain is designed
to procreate, procreate.
Safety and procreation,
and that's it.
And that runs us and
that runs sexuality.
>>LISA: So that reptilian brain,
or that brain is telling us,
do the dishes, get a reward.
It doesn't seem to be the same.
>>GRAY: The reward
is not close to it.
Doing the dishes never
created a big reward for men.
Women don't go shopping
for men who do dishes, OK?
That was generally the
lower part of the chain of,
you want a guy with a job
that makes a bit more money
than that.
But when you go back
to the instincts, what
happens is that that
primitive brain,
it promotes the production
of sexual hormones.
One of those is
testosterone, and that's
the primary difference
between men and women
on a hormonal level.
Men require 20 to 50 times
more testosterone to be
in love with a woman.
Men need that testosterone
to get up in the morning
in order to do their job and
do things that they don't even
want to do, but have to do.
And they're happy to do
it as long as there's
a reward of someone loves them.
They get the admiration,
they get the appreciation.
>>LISA: And the
testosterone goes up?
>>GRAY: The anticipation-- if
I do this and make this money,
she's going to love me and I'm
going to get the big reward,
the reptilian brain kicks up
the testosterone big time.
>>LISA: That's why there are so
many testosterone supplements
on the market today.
>>GRAY: That's why so
many-- and it's not
about taking testosterone,
it's learning
how to make testosterone,
and that's the dynamic.
Even for health, they find
that taking testosterone
doesn't make you
healthier, and actually can
inhibit your ability to
make your own testosterone.
But it's learning
how to make it.
And ultimately, part of
understanding men and women
is to recognize that
man's well-being comes
when behaviors between
a man and a woman
promote testosterone in him.
And for women, her
well-being is directly
tied to more female
hormones, not testosterone.
It's estrogen and
progesterone and oxytocin,
which helps to lower
the testosterone
so her estrogen can go up.
So we're like little see-saws.
So when women go too
far to their male side,
their estrogen goes down.
>>LISA: Which is happening
now with more women
in the workplace, higher
positions, more stress levels.
And then they're
also not letting
go of the nurturing home
duties with the child raising
and the schooling and
the aging parents.
So we've added so many
things onto our plate now.
>>GRAY: Oh, yeah.
It's so much to
do, so much to do.
So women feel overwhelmed.
And when a man has so much to
do, ironically, his tendency--
because he is
testosterone-driven,
meaning it's a primary
hormone in his body--
he can easily forget
everything that has to be done.
I can have 50 things
I need to do and sit
in front of a football
game and forget it all.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: Whereas my wife,
we still have to do this
and we have to do this.
>>LISA: Can't understand it.
>>GRAY: And she'll be doing
the laundry and whatever.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: It's like,
busy, busy, busy.
So we have a shut-off
switch, which
just that is an important
concept because men
often, when women are
talking about things,
men will say, just forget it.
Don't worry about it.
You don't have to do that.
And all that does is
invalidate her and she
doesn't feel supported.
She doesn't feel heard.
She doesn't feel
helped in any way.
>>LISA: There's anxiety there.
>>GRAY: But he
thinks it should work
because it would work for
him to say oh, forget it,
I'm not going to do it.
We can shut it off.
Women have more difficulty
shutting it off.
And part of it is when women
are over on that male side,
they can do it to
a certain extent.
But the body seeks balance.
So after she's
achieving goals, she
wants to come home and relax.
That's going over
to the female side.
And when she goes over
to the female side, what
she might find is a
bunch of messy feelings.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: Because see, she's been
pushing them down all day long
to look--
>>LISA: So she just wants to
talk, talk, talk, talk, talk.
>>GRAY: The workplace is
a place where you can't
share all your feelings, OK?
You have--
>>LISA: Especially now.
>>GRAY: Yeah.
You've got to be
right up front with--
competent, confident no
issues, no questions.
I've got solutions.
So that's your male side.
That pushes emotions down.
And for women,
those emotions need
to come up and be
expressed if they're
going to have estrogen.
See, men don't
need to do it as much because
men don't need the estrogen so
much.
>>LISA: But we need
the oxytocin that
comes from that ability to
share and talk and collaborate.
>>GRAY: What oxytocin
does-- it became aware
about 20 years ago.
We found that when women
are talking about things,
oxytocin goes up and their
stress levels go down.
Now, a little more deeper
science, you go into it,
is that when women are talking
and feeling relaxed and sharing
what's inside, oxytocin--
the bonding hormone--
starts getting produced.
And as an outcome of that,
testosterone starts going down
and her estrogen
starts going up.
And as testosterone
goes down, her
progesterone-- if that's needed
at that time in her cycle--
will come up.
Progesterone is
actually the substance
they make testosterone out of.
So when women are in that
male, achieving goal thing,
they can't make the
progesterone their body needs.
So then what happens, if they're
in the cycle from ovulation
to their period, they get PMS.
They get what's called
estrogen dominance
because their progesterone
levels are so low.
Because literally,
biologically, your body
makes the testosterone necessary
to push the feelings down
to get the job done, to push
away-- gee, I don't like this,
but I'm going to do it any
way to achieve the goal.
That's testosterone.
It lets you go and do the dirty,
difficult, dangerous stuff
without whining and complaining.
>>LISA: But estrogen,
on the other hand,
gives us the ability
to communicate.
It's what makes us social.
We have the ability
to reason, have
better logic, better decision
and executive functioning.
>>GRAY: All personal.
>>LISA: Estrogen helps
us with so many thing.
>>GRAY: So many things.
But simplified, it
makes you happy.
>>LISA: It does, yeah.
>>GRAY: It's love.
We've really got
to come down to,
we need more love in our lives.
We need to be happier.
You know, when you're happy,
you're loving your life.
You're loving the
people in your life.
You're forgiving the people.
When you're happy, when your
estrogen levels are higher,
you're going to see
what's good instead
of focusing on what's not good.
Low estrogen can produce
high perfectionism.
When you live in that world,
nothing is ever good enough
and no man is ever good enough.
So when a man gets the
message he's not good enough,
his testosterone goes down.
Because when you get that
message you did a good job,
and it was good enough,
you feel accepted.
>>LISA: You got that
from your mother, even.
Yeah.
>>GRAY: Hopefully, you
got it from your mother.
>>LISA: Hopefully.
>>GRAY: If you go to--
you know, I've taught
in San Quentin,
and prisoners never got that.
They basically--
here's the irony.
Such low self-esteem
because they never got that.
So they turned to
criminal behaviors
because they don't feel they're
going to be loved and supported
in what they do.
And ironically, when
you do dangerous stuff,
it does produce a
lot of dopamine,
which gives you motivation.
If you're successful at
something and people love you,
you get a lot of dopamine.
But if you don't get
love, you find other ways
to get your dopamine.
You could be doing dangerous
things, you can be doing drugs,
you can waste all your
life watching porn.
All these things produce
dopamine and ironically,
why do men need more dopamine?
Because they're not
on their male side.
They're not accomplishing
and achieving
and getting love for it.
Men need love, women need love.
But often, it's a
different kind of love.
If you look at
the biology of men
and look at the
biology of women--
>>LISA: It's interesting, real
quick, how relationships really
boils down to chemistry.
>>GRAY: Oh, yeah.
I mean, everything is
more than just chemistry.
We have spirit, we have a mind.
But the bottom line is we
live in this house here
and it's affected.
You can have all the spiritual
insights in the world,
and if you're deficient
in the right hormones,
you're going to be depressed.
And a big
misunderstanding-- this
is a great takeaway
from our conversation--
is when you think about men's
aggression and bad behavior--
selfish behavior and so
forth, hurtful behavior,
being mean, not caring,
being abusive-- this happens.
And if you look at
what's happening in men,
everybody thinks
it's testosterone.
But actually, it's not.
Any man who is
aggressive, angry, upset,
mean, his testosterone
is actually going down
and his estrogen is going up.
When men go too far
to the female side,
they become dysfunctional.
When women go too
far to the male side,
they become unloving.
You can't love if you're
not on your female side.
But if men are too much on the
female side, they can't love.
>>LISA: Now, there's no excuse
for a man being aggressive
and et cetera with a woman.
>>GRAY: We're just
explaining the biology.
>>LISA: Yeah, we're
just explaining-- yeah.
>>GRAY: But let's
learn from that.
Let's learn from
big arguments, OK?
And this is like--
unless you understand
the difference
between men and women,
this would not make sense.
But if you're in an
argument with your wife,
if you're a man, you need
to realize, stop talking.
Because when you're upset, when
you have emotions and you talk,
then your estrogen will go up.
This why women
come to therapists.
They get to talk
about their feelings.
90% of the people who will pay
to just have someone listen
to your feelings is because
if you're low on estrogen,
go talk about your
feelings to somebody.
Let them enter into
you, penetrate into you,
and hear you with empathy.
Your estrogen levels will go
up and your cortisol levels
will go down.
Hormonal balance
lowers cortisol.
When you have elevated
cortisol, your hormones
are out of balance.
So we're back to, in our
stressful times, well,
part of how we create stressful
lives by the expectations
and the requirements that we
have in order to feel good
or to feel lovable
or to get happiness
or whatever, we have
all these standards.
They are created from
hormonal imbalance.
And then we experience stress.
Our choices-- the
choices we make
tend to come from our hormones.
>>LISA: So are you saying
that it's not really
the nature of men and women
having a difficult time
communicating?
It's because our
hormones are so out
of balance because of
our stressful lives
that it then impacts
the communication.
>>GRAY: That, too.
I'm saying-- that
actually is another way
of saying what I said.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: But what
I'm saying is often
we say the stress is causing
the problem, and what I'm saying
is the choices we make based
upon hormonal imbalance,
not knowing how to
balance our hormones.
This is a new thing
we have to learn,
how to balance our hormones.
We all know hormones
are out of balance.
>>LISA: It's not through taking
the hormones, though, right?
>>GRAY: No, not through taking--
if you take hormones,
you're not learning
how to make them yourself.
And your body is designed,
at every stage of life,
to make the right
amount of hormones.
Many women will say, oh,
I'm going through menopause
so I can't make
as much hormones.
Well, you don't make
as many hormones,
but that's not the
source of your problem.
It's the balance
of those hormones.
Because when you're
no longer at the age
where you can make
babies, your body
doesn't need as many
hormones, but it needs
the right hormonal balance.
And so it's like
learning what behaviors
stimulate female hormones?
What behaviors
stimulate male hormones?
And it's not like you should
be a traditional woman,
where most of your life is just
stimulating female hormones.
We've outgrown that.
That's too limiting.
Consciousness says,
I want to be whole.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: So if you're going
to express your male side,
you have to learn
along the way how
to keep coming back
to your female side,
how to keep coming back
to your female side.
And a relationship
can be a safe harbor
for women to come back to
their female side, and for men
to actually rebuild their
testosterone after their day.
So here's an example.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: So women and men,
they get in a little argument.
Couples get in these
fights, arguments.
Women and men.
There's starting to be tension.
Well, if we understand
this dynamic,
we recognize that
whenever men are
argumentative, defensive,
irritable, angry,
their testosterone
levels are going down.
Their estrogen
levels are going up.
For him to talk at that time
will only throw him further out
of balance.
And once he's in a
fight or flight mode,
for her to talk to him at that
moment will just throw her out
of balance because he cannot
hear her with empathy.
When you're in cortisol
mode, you cannot hear someone
in empathy.
So suddenly--
>>LISA: And her
testosterone's going up too.
>>GRAY: She has
to defend herself.
She has the raise her
sword and defend herself.
Her estrogen goes down.
She needs to find somebody
to talk to about her feelings
to open her heart again,
and go back and approach
that conversation.
He needs to stop
talking, withdraw,
do something that will
boost his testosterone-- we
can explore those things.
Boost the testosterone.
Then, when it
comes back up, he's
going to open his heart again,
reflect on what just happened,
and go back and start again.
>>LISA: So take a break.
If you're having an
argument, take a break.
Both go to your
respective corners.
One doesn't talk,
the other one talks.
>>GRAY: To somebody else.
>>LISA: Right, to somebody else.
And then come back and see if
the communication's different.
>>GRAY: Only when you
have your heart open.
And when you come back
with your heart open,
you don't try to attack that
problem again right away.
You come back and
do loving things
so you feel safe and
comfortable again.
>>LISA: Oh, that's nice.
>>GRAY: It's like in
my marriage, we just--
whenever I go to my
cave, I come back and I--
I would come back and give her--
kind of touch her on her hair
or whatever, see where she is.
If she bristles, then she's
still needing her time.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: But she'll
melt into my hand
and then I might join in
doing something with her,
and I give her and say,
I love you so much.
And we just-- like that
whole argument didn't happen.
You just let it go back, let
yourself re-establish trust.
And then, if you're
trying to figure out
how you're going to invest
in something, or make money,
or how you're going
to treat the children,
bring that subject up again
having reflected on how you--
I would reflect on
how I have contributed
to making the problem worse.
>>LISA: It's interesting
you say that about finances
because one of the biggest
sources of conflict
in a relationship
is money, right?
>>GRAY: Money.
And how you raise the
children, that's another one.
And how you spend your time.
And how much housework
he's willing to help do.
>>LISA: But you're saying it's
not about those issues at all.
>>GRAY: Well, the
conflict part of it--
the tension part of it is we
start to feel not heard, OK?
Then our hormones are
going out of balance.
What men start to feel and
what women start to feel
is slightly different.
So let me come back
to hormonal imbalance.
If men need more
testosterone, what
are the kinds of love and
messages of love that men
need to rebuild testosterone?
And if a woman needs
testosterone, the same things.
>>LISA: Rewards.
>>GRAY: Well, reward.
Reward to a man is appreciation.
Oh, what a good idea.
Oh, that makes sense.
All right, that's helpful.
Help me do this.
See, whenever a man
feels, I'm in a hero role,
I'm in a provider role,
I can give to you.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: Would he do
something for you?
When he can be in that place
and you're appreciating him--
because he doesn't know
he's making a difference
unless you light
up and do a Lisa.
[LAUGHTER]
You're the best.
You appreciate.
All the speakers come, they
just want to talk to you.
Because you-- oh, brilliant.
Oh, what a good idea.
Oh, how wonderful.
And I've been with
you and your husband,
and you're just so
full of appreciation.
You're like a magnet.
You make men feel like, I
want to do more for you.
I want to give more for you.
So appreciation is one thing.
And women want to
be appreciated too.
And it will boost
their testosterone.
But generally speaking--
>>LISA: If they accept it.
>>GRAY: Either one, you don't
need as much testosterone
if you're a woman.
That's the point.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: And often, when
women are out of balance,
one of the signs of
being out of balance
is, I don't feel appreciated.
Really, she's saying my male
side needs more appreciation.
Actually, what her female
side needs at those times is
I need more respect.
I need to be honored.
I need to be prioritized.
I need to be treated
with respect.
That's what women need the most.
Their mind goes, oh,
I'm on the male side.
You feel, I want
to be appreciated.
But actually, you need
to be respected more.
That raises estrogen.
So appreciation
bumps up testosterone,
respecting, honoring, helping,
supporting-- so when I talked
about men listening and not
talking right away,
that's honoring her.
As opposed to-- many
men today, if they
don't understand
differences, she
says you're not listening to me.
He says, well, you're
not listening to me.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: He'll complain
right back, you know?
Why do you get to talk
and I have to listen?
>>LISA: Like you're
in preschool.
>>GRAY: We go right into it.
All these couples will do this.
And--
>>LISA: All the time.
>>GRAY: --it's not like
it's just men that close up.
Women close up too.
They close their
hearts, and they
get into all this
little stuff like that.
>>LISA: And we say we need
to take care of ourselves,
and then we retreat.
>>GRAY: Well, if you retreat
to share how you feel,
it's probably the most
powerful estrogen stimulator
to take responsibility to
bring your hormones back
into balance.
Also, taking me-time, nurturing
time, is also a good thing.
But typically, when it
came from conversation,
having somebody-- or even a
journal and praying to God
or whatever-- a lot of different
ways to articulate what
you're feeling.
What happens when you
articulate emotions--
>>LISA: Oh, yes, use your
voice, use your words.
It helps so much.
>>GRAY: So much.
Because what happens
is when you use words,
this part of the
brain is now in charge
of this part of the brain.
See, we got reptilian
brain, we have monkey brain.
All the conditioning
of our childhood,
our parents' childhood,
their parents' childhood
all got passed on to us here.
So we have these automatic
reactivity, which is always
about right and wrong, judgment,
good and bad, protection,
and all that.
It's just automatic reactions.
That's this part of the brain.
This is the part of the
brain, prefrontal cortex, that
has the only DNA that's human.
And this is the part of us where
we can self-reflect and go,
you know, I think I could
change what I just did.
That didn't work.
Maybe I adjust myself.
I can adjust that.
>>LISA: It's the higher
consciousness part.
>>GRAY: Yeah, this is
the higher consciousness.
Actually, this is the
higher human self,
which can connect with
the higher consciousness
self, spirit.
This is the mind.
Then we got all this
reactivity, and then we
got reptilian stuff that drives
so much that we don't even
know.
And we don't have
any control over it,
but we can decide
what it should do.
So this is like on
Friday, you say, OK, I'm
going to lose some weight,
not eat so much dessert.
OK, that's this part of
the brain saying that.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>GRAY: And then
you see the dessert
and you say, well,
I'll start tomorrow.
That's this part of the brain.
So the point of view of
discipline-- and not saying
you have to be so
extremely disciplined--
but whenever you
discipline, what happens
is you make this part
of the brain stronger.
And this part of
the brain doesn't
control this part of the brain.
And when you articulate
what your emotions are,
without trying to
change somebody--
that's very important.
Articulate how I feel.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: See, if I'm using my
emotions to get you to change--
and that's the
primitive-- that's
what the monkey brain does.
It gets angry--
>>LISA: I want it my way.
>>GRAY: My way or
I cry a lot, then
you'll change out of sympathy.
Or I'm afraid so I don't
have to do anything.
The monkey uses emotions
to manipulate and change
other people and
change situations.
What we have to do is go
to this part of the brain
and articulate, to somebody
who understands us-- that just
helps us to connect
more with empathy--
what we're going through.
So that this part of
the brain's in control.
And it's not going to go
back to your partner with all
this blame and all
this "you hurt me"
and all this "I'm
angry with you."
Because what are
they going to do?
They're just going
to defend back.
It's the nature of human beings.
>>LISA: Yes.
This is so great because
we don't necessarily
have this model in our lives.
A lot of us maybe
watched our parents--
products of the '50s,
products of the '60s and '70s.
And it wasn't really this level
of equality in a relationship.
Now, I want to make
sure our audience knows
that it is same thing with same
sex marriages and couples that
are same sex couples.
It's just one takes
more of a dominant--
>>GRAY: That's right.
One just has-- by
nature, they just
happen to be more
masculine or more feminine.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: And you honor that.
All I'm saying is that if you're
having these symptoms of heart
closed, OK?
It's just if your
heart is closed,
your hormones are out
of balance for you.
No one can tell
you what that is.
You have to find it for you.
But generally speaking,
when women are heart-closed,
they're too far on
their male side.
A symptom of that is "I have
so much to do, I have to,
I have to."
Overwhelm.
That word in our brain that
says I have to, I have to,
that is on the male side.
Ironically, that's the best
phrase I have in my life.
I have to get up and do this.
I have to write this book.
That actually raises
my testosterone
and gives me the
energy to do things.
>>LISA: Let's talk about sex.
So if you have this woman who's
overwhelmed throughout the day
and then she says I have to
have sex to please my mate,
her testosterone goes--
>>GRAY: Oh, it
makes it horrible.
It's horrible.
This is one of the
unfortunate things.
I'll take an extreme
version of this in China,
where women don't even
know they can enjoy sex.
They just do it to
placate their husbands.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: It's this
ordeal they do,
where sex education--
and for women
to learn that sex is
actually for them,
and that sex is actually one
of the most powerful ways
to increase estrogen.
But generally speaking,
you need a willing partner
to focus their desire on you.
So sex communication is a whole
area, learning sexual skills.
Often, men are not
educated in that.
Often women don't
understand what
makes their body more
fulfilled during sex.
>>LISA: So women need to
understand that sex is more
about giving to themselves.
>>GRAY: Yes.
>>LISA: How can that happen?
How do we get more
clear about that,
and how can a man support that?
>>GRAY: Well, the
way she can-- it
can be about her
if she recognizes
how to guide a man in sex, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: So this is like--
if you say to a man don't do
that, he'll shut down, OK?
Most men, particularly when
they're that vulnerable,
they can't take criticism.
It's hard to take criticism.
Once you learn how to
communicate in sex,
you can have fun
having conversations,
make jokes while
you're having sex.
That's a really good
place to be if you
can keep that energy going.
But in the beginning,
couples usually get quiet
and they don't
communicate about it.
They're so afraid of being
rejected because you're
so vulnerable at that time.
The man is vulnerable
because all he wants to do
is please the woman.
It seems to the woman
that all he wants to do
is please himself, but
actually, he wants to please her
and that will please himself.
>>LISA: A conscious man.
>>GRAY: Well, you're right.
That's the difference.
That's what women have to--
one distinction.
Men in the past didn't care
about pleasing women in sex.
It was for men.
And women did it for
men as an obligation.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: Conscious men today--
almost all men that
I've ever met, when I--
I do classes on sex, OK?
So in there, we have the
men talk about their best
sexual experiences.
There's not one exception
to this in the room.
The man will describe
the woman's orgasm.
It's her pleasure that
makes him feel so good.
See, this is the
bottom line difference
between men and women.
If I can make you happy,
it boosts my testosterone.
If you're not happy,
I feel like I failed.
But then women go, why does
he have sex the way he does?
Because he doesn't
understand women's timing,
a woman's body, what she needs.
And women often don't.
They just think,
what's wrong with me?
I'm not orgasmic.
I don't enjoy this.
Well, she might need a good
20, 30 minutes of foreplay.
And so she has to learn
how to slow him down.
And here's a simple phrase.
Mm, feels so good,
let's go slow.
Slow.
Move his hand up here, put
his hand behind your ear.
Ooh.
Blow in his ear, mm.
Give him the idea, do
the little things to him
so he gets the idea that's what
he does for you if he's not
open to just being told.
>>LISA: So it's communication
that you're talking about.
And it is having
communication before and after
and during sex.
It's all about communication.
>>GRAY: And it's
attitude about sex.
Sex is a beautiful thing.
It can be-- anything
beautiful can be misused.
But what women
have to understand
is when a man is erect, that's
his most vulnerable place.
That's when his
heart opens the most,
and that's why sex
sometimes creates violence.
Because men whose emotions from
childhood are so packed down,
the hatred, the rejection
from their mothers,
the abandonment issues.
So when they're
feelings open up,
they don't know
what to do with it.
Their estrogen shoots up and
they become their worst self.
>>LISA: Why do we see the Tinder
dating and the different type
of swipe left, swipe left?
Why is there a culture
so much of just
hook-ups and instant attraction?
There really isn't this
level of communication
in a lot of generations.
>>GRAY: Well, I
think Tinder happened
because it could
happen and there's
a lot of male programmers.
>>LISA: Right?
>>GRAY: Men just want
easy access to sex.
That is our primitive mode.
>>LISA: That's not
what you just said.
You said that we want
to have communication
to get testosterone up.
>>GRAY: No, no, we want
to have a woman say
she wants to have sex with me.
If a woman answers my Tinder--
I don't have Tinder, but
if she answers my Tinder,
it's like, oh, a woman wants me.
Suddenly-- it's all--
>>LISA: Approval, reward.
>>GRAY: To a certain extent,
more important than having sex
with a woman for testosterone
is knowing a woman wants
to have sex with you.
>>LISA: Gotcha.
>>GRAY: And this is
the nice little thing
for women on dates.
Men have this
expectation now you're
supposed to have sex with
them because so many women are
yielding to that
without relationship.
And that could be their choice.
I don't judge it.
But when you're with a man and
you want to go slower with him,
you don't want to
do it just for him,
you want to wait till
your fire ignites,
it might take slow to
do with this person.
So at that time, when he's
wanting to move faster,
one of the things you
can say is, oh, I really
like to go slow.
I'd love to.
My whole body wants to,
but I just want to go slow.
All he really needs to
hear is there's a chance,
there's an opening
that you want it.
It can calm things
down as opposed
to him feeling rejected.
Sexual rejection
is so hard on men,
just as emotional
rejection is hard on women.
If she's expressing
her feelings, men,
and you make a joke
and you minimize
what she's feeling--
that's ridiculous,
you're overreacting,
well, that's stupid.
Why would you feel that way?
When you do that, you're
putting a knife right
in her most vulnerable
place, right in your heart.
>>LISA: Well, let's
talk about this
in the context of the Me
Too movement because it's
a different conversation.
What is consent, really, John?
What is your opinion
of consent these days?
>>GRAY: Every change always is
going to have problems with it.
One of the problems
with Me Too is
it kind of sounds like
all men are that way.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: And not all
men are that way.
>>LISA: There are some
very, very sick men who are
and they're--
>>GRAY: Very sick men.
They're out there.
>>LISA: --starting
to go to jail.
>>GRAY: There always have been.
And so we're bringing light to
that, we're bringing education.
And my point is
you can educate men
to the end of the world
about how to treat a woman,
but if you don't educate men
how men and women are different,
they're never going
to get it sexually.
Because a woman can grab
my butt and I like it.
I don't care who she is.
If she bumps into my
crotch, OK, that was nice.
I don't feel offended by
it, I'm not hurt by it.
And some women aren't either.
But many women are.
There's a sensitivity that women
have that men can't comprehend.
>>LISA: More than ever
now, there's a heightened--
>>GRAY: A heightened
sensitivity.
So what happens, if you want
a man to be more considerate
and understanding of women,
rather than painting his him
as bad, paint him as
ignorant and teach him
all the other ways
women are different.
Then he can easily
swallow the idea
that it's a totally different
experience for a woman
to have a man come on
sexually in that way.
>>LISA: That is
key, that is key.
>>GRAY: And one of the
good things about Me Too--
I'll say the good
thing about it--
is I like consent.
I think it's really
great for couples
to be able to talk about sex,
about affection, about touch.
One of the things in my marriage
that made it work so great
is if I'm in the mood
for sex, I'd say,
honey, I'm in the mood for sex.
Let's have sex soon.
I had no issue with, oh,
I'm going to be rejected
or whatever.
It was an easy thing to do.
Many couples, the man wants to
have sex but doesn't say it.
The woman doesn't
know he wants sex.
And other times, she's in
the mood, but she's not.
There's all this mystery
around sex instead of being
able to openly talk about it.
And you know, one
of the techniques
I do for couples
that have difficulty
talking about it is candles.
His candle, her candle.
If ever she's in the mood,
she should put that candle,
light that candle.
Oh, it'll be a
celebration for him.
When he's in the mood,
he lights his candle.
But it doesn't mean we
have to have sex tonight.
It means, I just
want you to know
I'm having these
feelings towards you
and you can reciprocate when
you want to let me know.
>>LISA: So there's
no pressure there.
>>GRAY: No pressure.
>>LISA: Yes.
So back to-- so I read this
poll about men and women
in the workplace,
and that men are
terrified to talk to women
now in the workplace,
in fear of losing their jobs
for some type of an accusation.
And the poll was
around, basically, women
stay by themselves and
men stay by themselves.
So this needs repairing.
Obviously, men and women have
to communicate in the workplace
and there's collaboration
that can happen.
How can we repair
the conversation?
How can we do that?
>>GRAY: Well, I
think, as we soften--
right now we're swinging
in one direction--
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: --and looking at that.
And I believe, as
with everything,
the pendulum swings back
and we will soften with it.
But ironically, in
a world where we're
trying to bring men
and women together,
close, what we've
just created is
another riff of, you
know, men can't be men,
women can't be women.
But there's a reflection.
When we pull apart,
there's always a reflection
of how we can make adjustments.
And that was one
of the main points
from "Beyond Mars and Venus."
If you don't understand men,
if men will stop talking
and say I need to think
about this and withdraw,
women will go after
him and judge him.
You can't do that, how can you
pull out of a conversation?
They'll go after him at a
time when anything he says
will only make it worse
for her and for him.
And I want to just
share, with Bonnie,
I remember when we were 23
years into the marriage.
It was one of the most
beautiful things she said.
All my messages basically
are coming from her.
She taught me all this stuff,
and I contributed somewhat.
So at 23 years, I remember
I said, honey, how
do you rate me as a husband?
And I was feeling particularly
confident that day.
And she said, John, as a
father to our children,
I can't imagine a better father.
A plus, A plus.
As a husband,
you're not perfect.
So I paused.
I said, oh, tell me about that.
She says, well, I
know every time--
she said you're not
perfect, but you've
given me the best gift
any woman could ever want.
And I went, oh, what's that?
And she said, I know
that, for 23 years,
I'll say things and do things
that can really upset you,
but when you get upset,
you always stop talking.
You go to your cave.
You do some magic--
I don't know what it is-- and
you come out with more love.
We're always loving
each other more.
So I know there's nothing I
can do to ever push you out
of my life.
>>LISA: Is that the one action
that you would tell people
to take right now?
To take that beat, that moment
in the heat of an argument?
>>GRAY: To take a timeout.
>>LISA: Even if it's
on the phone, hang up.
>>GRAY: Yeah.
Just let me-- try to learn
how to do it gracefully.
Instead of "I'm not going to
listen this crap anymore,"
try to make it more graceful.
>>LISA: Don't hang
up on each other.
>>GRAY: I need some time
to think about this.
That's all.
And the woman can
say the same thing
if he's pushing her buttons.
I need some time to
think about it, and stop.
And people say they can't stop.
I get it, they can't stop.
The emotional brain
is controlling them.
The monkey brain is
into that pattern.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: That's why we need
to review these ideas.
Men and women are
really different.
Men, our job is
to protect women.
You'll get so many kudos.
I'm not a perfect husband,
but I gave my wife
the best gift she
could ever want simply
because if I started to get
angry, I stopped talking.
I'd go and do something in
order to bring back my heart.
And what do I do?
This is important information.
This is why men have
to understand hormones.
First thing I do is I
temporarily say forget it.
Don't think about
what just happened.
Temporarily forget it.
Do something that
makes you feel good,
that's healthy for
your body as well.
Could be exercise,
could be meditation.
>>LISA: Gardening,
whatever it is.
>>GRAY: Could be reading a
book, could be gardening.
Anything that actually
you're good at.
Go drive your car,
listen to some music.
If you're good at it
and you love doing it.
So do something you can do well.
That will always boost
your testosterone.
Anytime you feel
confident and you're
doing something productive,
testosterone goes up.
>>LISA: In women.
>>GRAY: In men or women.
That's what creates-- we
both make testosterone when
we're accomplishing things.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: But for
women, what they need
to do to come back to
settle and open their heart
is talk about their emotions.
If you go out and do
something you're competent at,
your testosterone
is going to go up.
You're just going to
disconnect from your emotions.
You don't want to disconnect
from your emotions.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And the more you
disconnect from them,
when you finally get
there, they're very messy.
And what that means is they're
stronger than they should be.
They're an accumulation
of other things
that are bothering you from 15
years ago, from here to here.
They all come up like a volcano.
And at that time, when
you have excess emotions,
strong emotions, your brain's
job is to justify them.
So now you say, you
did that and that's so
bad, it makes me feel all of
this, as opposed to all of this
could be 15 other things,
could be your childhood.
Could be your
parents' childhood.
You know, the whole
basis of psychology
is that we bring forth the
past into our reactions.
>>LISA: What is the
biggest complaint
that people come to you with?
>>GRAY: Oh, the biggest one
today is they want passion.
>>LISA: Is that it?
>>GRAY: They're not feeling the
passion in the relationship.
And so many people--
they even end their marriages
as a conscious uncoupling,
which is as friends.
But why do they do that?
Because they don't excite
each other anymore.
Sometimes--
>>LISA: They're OK with
being apart and friends.
>>GRAY: Yeah, they could be.
And I grant, that's
a great thing to be.
But often, what brought
them to that place
of ending a relationship
is the lack of passion
in the relationship.
And here's the irony.
It's the higher self
that wants the passion.
The old fashioned self says,
hey, contentment is fine.
And for those who want
contentment, that's fine.
That's the way the
world used to be.
You're almost like a
business arrangement, brother
and sister, after
the sex goes away.
And there's nothing wrong with
that if people choose that.
But there's another
thing, which is
how to create lasting passion.
And it is possible,
but it takes education.
>>LISA: It does.
>>GRAY: That's why I wrote
"Beyond Mars and Venus."
>>LISA: It does.
>>GRAY: There's so many things
that we men have to learn.
For example, to
produce estrogen. Women
are over on testosterone land,
how to get back to estrogen.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: Well, the hormone
oxytocin lowers testosterone,
allows estrogen to come up.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>GRAY: So how to
create oxytocin.
That means every time I
walk through the room,
I stroke my wife's hair.
That means that
there's any opportunity
to join in and do something
with her, doing things
together, offering to
do something for her,
planning something,
little things.
Buying three flowers
and bringing them home.
Calling her on the
phone, saying I love you.
My basic rule was
four hugs a day.
First time I see her,
I give her a hug.
And it's not just a quick hug.
It's a full-body--
not sexual, pump hug--
but a full-body hug where
I squeeze her in my arms
and try to feel a part of
me that loves her and would
die for her.
This is the thing.
We men will die
for our partners.
This is who we are.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And I have to
say-- and then when I say--
>>LISA: The right men will.
The right men will.
>>GRAY: Educated men will.
>>LISA: Educated.
OK.
>>GRAY: They don't understand
their power, just as women
don't understand their power.
When women want more--
>>LISA: Let's talk about it.
>>GRAY: --what they try to do is
they try to get him to change.
Your power as women is to
accept him just as he is.
Don't try to change him.
Appreciate, accept
him just as he is.
Don't push.
Don't try to change.
And then start to gently
ask for more, asking
for more, asking for more.
Bring out more from him based
upon he's already successful.
Men do not respond to criticism.
Just as women don't respond to
correction of their feelings,
men don't respond to
correction of their behavior.
And this takes a
conscious effort.
>>LISA: Yes.
So what's a way to
say that so it's
not criticizing, but honey, I
love what you're doing here.
Do you think we can do
this this way next time?
Is that a good way to say it?
>>GRAY: First of all, let me
say tone of voice is everything.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: If your happiness is
dependent upon him changing,
it won't work no matter
what word you use.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>GRAY: It's all about notice--
this is my four-step process.
Notice how you try to change
him and know that doesn't work
and it will never work
and it's not his fault.
You don't try to change people.
That's not what love is.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: You don't try to--
unless they're saying,
how can you change me?
>>LISA: Yeah.
Who's saying that?
>>GRAY: Well, it
could be disapproval.
A look of disapproval
is an attempt
to change somebody, manipulate
them with the monkey brain.
Getting upset with
him and telling him
you shouldn't do that,
it really hurt me.
That's an attempt to change him.
All that is trying
to change him.
Everything we're taught,
how to communicate, so much
of that is-- if your
intent is to change him,
he will resist on some level.
You will not get what you want.
You first have to give up
trying to change this person.
Second step is notice, at
those times when you're wanting
to change him, you're unhappy.
You're responsible for
your happiness, not him.
>>LISA: Well, maybe because
something was wrong.
Something went wrong.
Something was done wrong to you.
>>GRAY: That's right.
And who's responsible
for becoming happy again?
>>LISA: Your feelings,
you're responsible for them.
>>GRAY: You're responsible.
I can say to a whole audience,
who believes that you're
responsible for your happiness?
They all agree.
And then they get married.
He makes me unhappy.
He did that.
>>LISA: Yes, it's
his fault. Yeah.
>>GRAY: So yes, he can poke
you and it makes you unhappy.
There's no doubt about that.
But how can you become happy?
>>LISA: So you're
temporarily unhappy.
And then your response--
>>GRAY: He can poke you.
Somebody can bruise me, OK.
But if I say you are
responsible for that bruise,
I can't heal it.
I'm the one who has to heal it.
I have to come back to happy.
So every time you want
change, look inside.
Find your own dissatisfaction
and come back to happiness.
Now, what does it mean to
come back to happiness?
Hormonal balance, that's
the whole message I have.
All you have to do when you're
unhappy trying to change a man,
come back to producing
estrogen. That's it.
That's what women are lost in
today, their testosterone side.
Testosterone in women will
always say, it's a problem,
it has to be fixed.
A problem and it
has to be fixed.
It's not enough, not enough.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: Estrogen comes over here
and goes, this baby is perfect.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: This baby--
look at this baby.
I'll clean the poop
up off this baby.
This is--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: Being in love is
high levels of estrogen.
Your estrogen levels
double if you're
a woman to have an orgasm.
This is ecstasy.
We men want to go
inside of women
to have our estrogen levels
go that high through you
for a moment.
But then it causes
our testosterone
to go down, which is
why we go to sleep
and we pull away to rebuild the
testosterone to then come back.
And that's a whole
other dance of intimacy.
>>LISA: That's a
relaxation thing.
Yes.
>>GRAY: So we come
back to, basically
for women and estrogen, how to
stimulate estrogen for women.
One thing is I'm
coming back to her.
She's stressed, she's
overwhelmed, whatever.
I join in.
I do something.
That stimulates oxytocin.
Oxytocin lowers her
testosterone, which
is the drive to fix and solve.
>>LISA: So you're helping.
>>GRAY: Allows
estrogen to come up.
>>LISA: You're supporting,
you're helping,
you're doing
something supportive.
>>GRAY: Our job has always
been to help women be happy.
It's not any different.
It's just women are
different today.
They don't need men
to make the money.
to hold a guard--
hold a sword outside
the house, saying,
don't go to war, all that stuff.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: What is
our role anymore?
So men don't
understand our power
to provide support for women so
that women can make themselves
happier, A. And B,
once a woman is happy,
then we can do our real job,
which is to make her happier.
Only men can make you happier.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAY: That's it.
If you're heterosexual.
You're making her happier.
And that brought such
awareness to me as a man.
>>LISA: It's huge.
>>GRAY: My job is not
to make her happy.
So on days when
she's not happy, I
go, OK, I'm going to help
her find her happiness.
What can I do to help?
But I can't change her.
I can only provide a
context to support her
in finding her happiness.
But once she's in that centered
place, I can take her happier,
and that's romance.
That's romance and great sex.
>>LISA: So you can't
make her feel anything.
You can provide the context
so that she can feel better.
>>GRAY: And that's
the new relationship
if we want to grow today.
It's 100% accountability
for what you feel.
You can't be blaming the
world for how you feel.
You can acknowledge, the
world made me feel this way.
But now I have the ability to--
anyway, four steps.
First step, stop trying
to change others.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: Come back to
realizing, at those times,
you're not happy and fulfilled.
Your hormones are
out of balance.
Do something to
balance your hormones.
You will come back to a
sense of greater wholeness
at that point.
Because you're way over here.
You're to come back over here.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: Then step three is
not to ask for more yet.
Give more.
This is where-- if you give
more from fulfillment, then
it's received.
If you give more from
emptiness, it's manipulation.
And men smell it and women
end up feeling resentful.
Resentment is the killer
of estrogen. I did this
and I did this but--
>>LISA: It is.
It's the killer of everything.
It is.
Resentment is very, very toxic.
>>GRAY: Very toxic.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: But what it
is is it's the basis--
when you're in your male side,
you do things for reward.
Testosterone is I do
things for reward.
I do things to create
a change, an effect.
>>LISA: OK.
What about the fact
that if you expect
a man to clean up
after himself or expect
him to do the dishes after
you cook, or expect something,
they shouldn't need a reward
for something that they
should be doing anyway.
>>GRAY: Again, a whole new
revelation to understand, OK?
Yes, whenever you
have an opportunity
to appreciate a man, you
should appreciate a man.
See, that's called taking
your partner for granted.
Let me give you an example of
how to kill a relationship.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>GRAY: He should just do
that, he should just do that.
And a nice little
story when I began
to realize, what does it mean to
take your partner for granted?
Well, I took Bonnie
out for dinner--
a nice little place for dinner.
And I'm leaving and I
open the door, romantic,
I was a little bit dressed up.
And this very dashing,
handsome man comes walking up,
opens the other door for her.
So she's got two men
opening the door for her.
And she walks through
like a queen, you know?
It feels good to have people
open the door for you.
And she looks at that man
and she says, oh, thank you.
Now, what did the
tone of voice say?
The tone of voice
said, oh, thank you.
You didn't have to do that
and you did it anyway.
Now, John, I do his laundry,
so he better do that.
He owes me.
That's what kills romance.
All this expectation
of "he should do this."
As opposed to-- remember,
people want to be--
I want my marriage to be like
it was when we fell in love.
Well, go back to
when it was in love.
You had no expectations.
Whatever they did, you
thought it was a bonus.
It's a bonus.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: And the flip side, how
men take women for granted.
They stop giving them the hugs,
they stop doing the foreplay.
They stop stroking the hair.
They stop saying you look
so beautiful, I love you.
You're so smart,
it blows my mind.
You can say that
a million times.
Nobody gets tired of it.
I love you is four times a day.
Give a hug.
Hold hands when you're walking.
These little things we
did in the beginning,
men stop doing because, well,
she should know I love her.
Why do I have to do that stuff?
I already did that stuff.
>>LISA: Men stop doing
it and women stop it.
>>GRAY: That's the point.
>>LISA: So it's a combination.
>>GRAY: Exactly.
Both sides, we take for granted.
As opposed to recognizing love
is-- when you love someone,
you want to give them to them.
That is step three, remember?
Stop trying to change.
Come back to balance
so now you're full.
Now overflow into
them so you're giving
without requirement of return.
Loving is what it's about,
giving love, not receiving.
For children, it's
about receiving love.
We want to receive love.
That's our childlike self.
Our higher self, our
spirit self, wants to love.
>>LISA: Wants to give love, yes.
>>GRAY: Yeah, to give love.
So you have to
understand, what is
the love that's most
important to men
to bring out their best side?
What's the important
love for women?
So I summarize it.
There's many forms of this.
Appreciation, we talked about.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: When you appreciate
the things he does,
as opposed to going,
well, I did his laundry,
he should do the dishes.
Or I made all this money,
he should do da-da-da.
All that little tit-for-tat--
>>LISA: So just a simple act
of appreciate is so easy.
>>GRAY: Again and again.
And it doesn't have
to be "thank you."
It can be delight.
Oh, this is so helpful.
Thank you.
What a good-- any
chance you have
to acknowledge
something he does,
it's just a little wave
of love and keeps you
in that estrogen mode as well.
That's appreciation.
The next one is acceptance.
Acceptance is don't try to
improve him, change him,
unless he's asking for help.
>>LISA: What if he doesn't
do anything like the dishes,
or she doesn't do
anything to help?
What do you do if there's not
even anything to appreciate?
>>GRAY: Let me
finish how to give,
and then you'll know
how to get it, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: Step three is you've
got to give more to get more.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GRAY: You're asking,
how do I get more?
I haven't got there yet.
>>LISA: I love it.
>>GRAY: And anything
I say won't work
unless you stop
trying to change them,
you're really content within
yourself, you're whole.
Now you're giving
more of what you
know they need the most of
to pump their hormones back
into balance.
You can help them.
Appreciation, acceptance--
don't try to change them,
don't disapprove of them.
If you find yourself doing it,
suck it up, go somewhere else.
Rebuild your hormones,
come back into balance,
where you give
unconditional love.
This is the guy you picked.
I'm not talking about
the slob down the street.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: This is the
guy you married.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: OK?
Hopefully you did a little
investigation first.
You said, OK, he's the
one I want to love.
I'm going to accept
him just the way he is.
OK, so then you accept.
So you don't give
unsolicited advice.
That's one part of it.
You don't punish.
You don't withdraw your love
because he didn't do things
perfectly.
He's not perfect.
That's what love is.
Everybody's doing
the best they can.
It's the most spiritual thing
to accept someone the way
they are.
>>LISA: Someone's always looking
for the perfect relationship,
thinking, oh, if I would have
married that person or if this
would've-- and then
they get divorced,
thinking that they would have
a better chance at getting
another relationship.
>>GRAY: That's a woman's busy
brain, comparing, comparing
when she's on her male side.
When she's on her female
side, she's present.
She's able to appreciate what
she has, accept it, embrace it.
>>LISA: What if she's--
>>GRAY: Third need.
I gotta get those
needs in there.
>>LISA: OK, get them out.
>>GRAY: Trust.
Men need to feel trusted
and women need to trust.
Of course, every
woman says, I need
to feel I can trust my partner.
Well, as much as you need
to feel you can trust him,
he needs to feel trusted.
So what happens is he makes a
mistake-- he goes to his cave,
for example, and you go,
oh, he doesn't love me.
No, he doesn't love you.
I mean, of course, he loves you.
He's protecting you by going
to his cave to come back.
But you've pulled
back your trust.
And so he'll ignore
you for a few days.
He's busy working, whatever.
And say, oh, I close up because
he hasn't been loving me.
What you're doing in
that moment is going,
I don't trust that
he really loves me.
So there's all these
little loopholes
where you have to
find your reassurance.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And now, women
do need reassurance.
What I would know as a
man is to give reassurance
whenever possible.
That's why doing lots of
little things all the time,
that little affection,
that little warmth,
it gives her the reassurance
so she can give me what I need,
which is the trust.
But what do I need?
When people say
you're a hero, he's
someone I'll vote for,
pumps your testosterone up.
They're trusting you.
And the foundation
of trust is depending
on a man for certain things.
Whenever you depend
on a man, he's
going to have his
testosterone boosted.
>>LISA: Feels great.
>>GRAY: It's going
to feel great.
>>LISA: He feels wanted, needed.
>>GRAY: All that stuff-- needed.
To feel needed is the
most important thing.
Why are they most important?
They're testosterone boosters.
>>LISA: Gotcha.
>>GRAY: Now, to some women who
have more masculine qualities,
they can understand
that very much.
>>LISA: Totally.
>>GRAY: But not
even close to a man
because biologically, he needs
30 times more testosterone
than any woman walking
around, even the tough women.
OK, so now what do women need?
Men have to understand caring,
consideration, empathy,
understanding, respect.
So summarize it.
Caring, understanding,
and respect.
And that category of caring,
one of the first things that
happens when women are not
what we want them to be--
and this is the immaturity
in men-- is we go into,
well, then I don't care.
Well, then I give up.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And what
do women do when
they don't get what they want?
They go, well, I
can't trust him.
I can't trust him.
Just as a man goes into I
don't care, I don't give a--
whatever, she goes
into, I can't trust him.
And she'll start looking
at all the evidence of why
he's not perfect.
As opposed to all the evidence
of you can trust he loves you.
He cares.
He's doing his best.
Things are getting
better and better.
That's what trust is.
It's belief in the
possibilities rather than
believing in the
impossibilities.
And what happens to women
when their hormones are out
of balance is they can't go
into the place of trusting
and accepting and appreciating.
And when men's hearts are
closed, we stop caring.
We lose our motivation.
We don't want to do
the little things
that we did in the beginning.
>>LISA: So do women.
We stop caring as well.
Yes.
>>GRAY: Well, that's
a further-on stage.
It takes much longer--
women first go into,
I don't trust him.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And then I'm not
going to give to him.
>>LISA: It's hurt, resentment.
It happens right
between there too.
>>GRAY: Yeah, yeah.
There's a journey to it.
But her first thing is not
to just go well, then, I
don't care.
Her first thing is to go, well,
I don't trust that he loves me.
So now she's going to look
for messages that he loves her
or doesn't.
Eventually, she's so hurt,
there's so much resentment,
it takes a lot for a woman to
say, well, then I don't care.
>>LISA: What about a man that
cheats or betrays a woman?
>>GRAY: Or a woman who
cheats and betrays the man?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: Which is happening more
and more today because women
have more opportunity.
So what's the question?
Well, I'll give you
my answer to it.
>>LISA: How do you repair that?
>>GRAY: I see it over and over.
And I think one of the--
I don't want to sound
judgmental, so I--
I think it's a big
mistake for many couples
who love each other, have
children, and one of them
has an affair, however
it's found out.
Then the other partner
basically says, I will stop
and let's try to make this work.
And you rebuild
the relationship.
What we do is when a
partner has an affair,
we use that quite often--
not everybody-- as an excuse
to end the relationship.
Already they weren't
getting what they needed.
>>LISA: It wasn't
working anyway.
>>GRAY: It wasn't
working anyway,
and by conscience,
you can't go, I'm
going to get rid of this
partner when you have children.
Because all the research
shows that two happy parents
produce the happiest children.
There's always going to
be extra challenges when
you get a divorce, and
there's a lot to be said of--
>>LISA: There's a huge
divorce rate out there.
>>GRAY: Yeah.
>>LISA: It's over 50%.
>>GRAY: I've written a book
with Warren Farrell called
"Boy Crisis," and it
affects boys dramatically.
And we have all the
statistics on it.
It's huge.
At the same time, if
you do get a divorce,
the best thing you can do
for your children is never
say a disparaging word
about your partner.
Always hold them
up in high esteem.
Because that little boy, when
you talked about his father,
you're talking about him.
His father's inside of him.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>GRAY: And if you're a little
girl, you're talking about--
I'm just being on the
woman's side for a moment--
you're disparaging
the man, which
happens much more than
men disparaging women,
statistically.
She's disparaging the father,
a little girl gets the message,
can't trust men.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: Boy gets the
message, can't trust me.
I'm not good enough.
And what that does inside of a
boy is, when a woman is upset,
he merely gets
defensive and goes, see?
I failed.
As opposed to, oh,
what's going on here?
Let's see what I have to do.
You don't have that
huge reactivity
if you feel good
enough inside yourself.
>>LISA: So if you are
in a divorce situation,
treat your partner
with as much respect
as you can in front
of the children,
and that's the most
important thing.
>>GRAY: The other thing
is-- back to affairs--
is find a way to find
forgiveness and keep
the marriage
together, even if it
means having an open marriage.
Tell your children, grow up.
We need to open our minds.
To have children having to
move back and forth from home
to another--
it's really hard on them.
So you could actually have
a mother and father who
no longer enjoy sex together
for whatever reasons,
but they could be having
discrete relationships outside.
>>LISA: Discrete, yeah.
>>GRAY: Because we have
sexual needs, but the love
is there between the two.
But usually, we
just have so much
condemnation on people
who have affairs.
It's like, how
could you do that?
It's the worst
thing in the world.
When you go to many
other cultures,
it's not the worst
thing in the world.
We've painted it as the
worst thing in the world.
And quite often, we're
so insecure about love,
the thought that your partner
could be with somebody else is
like, oh, I knew it.
They didn't love me.
I knew it.
I can't get what
I need from them.
And it's a neediness.
It's an insecurity
within ourselves.
And I'm not saying
that you should just
condone it and go do it.
I'm not saying that at all.
But I'm saying you
should heal it and not
hold it against your partner
for the rest of your marriage.
You can't do that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
So what is step four?
>>GRAY: Step four is
the most important,
but it doesn't work unless
you do the previous steps.
So you've given up changing,
you're coming back to center,
you're now understanding
what your partner needs
to feel more loved.
Now they're going
to be naturally
motivated to give more to you.
Now, women are
automatically naturally more
motivated to give more.
When you give a man more,
when you give him more,
he thinks, oh, I did a good
job, so he'll tend to do less.
So that's why it gets
very confusing for women.
Because you just gave him
all this love and then
he gets lazy.
But it's like he did this
job, you gave him love,
and he feels like,
OK, now my job's over.
So once he feels
love, that's when
you use step four,
which is to ask
for more in small
increments with big rewards.
And the big reward,
again, is being
delighted and appreciative.
And the most important
way to motivate
men to change to become
more of who they are
is through connection.
His connection is when he feels
successful in doing something
for you.
So the bottom line technique
to create connection for women
is give him the
opportunity to serve you.
How can you do that?
So he's sitting in
there watching TV
and you say, oh, honey, when
you get a chance, I need help.
Boom.
Already, you've
just opened the door
to get more in
your relationship.
He's going to go,
well, what do you need?
Oh, I'll tell you when you
have only five or 10 minutes.
Let him wonder about it.
What's it going to be?
Well, go ahead and tell me now.
I'll put a pause on the TV.
I'll come over and
do-- what is it?
What is it?
And you give him a
little task to do.
Would you help me with this,
would you help me with that?
In the beginning, the
most important task
that any man can do that
will actually help you
more than anything, in
my opinion, is I just
want to tell you about
what happened today.
I don't want you
to say anything.
I'm just going to talk about
my frustrations, my concerns,
and I'll feel better.
And then give me a big hug.
It'll only take a few minutes.
Give him the complete
instructions.
Don't say anything.
Don't fix it.
Then give me a big hug.
So you talk a little
bit about your day.
You want to connect.
All these things have
happened and your two worlds
are so separate.
So you talk and then
he listens, and he
might interrupt with some
solutions, which men do.
And go, no, no, I don't
need you to say anything.
Just listen.
It's only going to
be a few minutes.
And just share inside
whatever you're
willing to share with him.
And then, after a few minutes,
go, oh, that felt good.
I feel more connected.
And go in for a hug and go, mmm.
And then walk into another room.
In that moment, he's going
to go, gee, what happened?
I did nothing, I said
nothing, and she thanked
me or it made her happy?
I can do this job.
So you're now training
him to listen.
Because the number
one help women
need to come back
to estrogen land
is to be able to
share what's inside.
When you start feeling
more connected,
then you start asking for little
things like, honey, tonight,
if you're doing dishes--
you imply dishes if he's not.
And when he married you,
he wasn't, let's say.
Then you say, honey, I'm
really tired tonight,
without I'm (WITH EMPHASIS)
really tired tonight.
I'm really tired tonight, would
you help me with the dishes?
Just ask for help
with the dishes.
And then that moves
into, oh, I just
want to sit and relax tonight.
Would you do the dishes?
And he's already
been built up knowing
that when I do dishes, later on
that night, there's great sex.
See?
That's a little reward as well.
>>LISA: Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
>>GRAY: And it will, you know?
The research shows that
when men do domestic things,
it improves the
sex life, primarily
because there's more connection.
But communicate--
>>LISA: And support.
>>GRAY: And support.
She doesn't feel alone.
It's hard for a woman to warm
up if she feels so separate.
She wants to get close again.
But not just so that
you should do that.
I do this, why
don't you do that?
>>LISA: But because
she's giving, giving,
giving all day long, that's
the receiving that she needs.
>>GRAY: But what I'm
focusing on here,
the first receiving
should be, I need
to have somebody connect with
me through understanding.
>>LISA: So say it.
>>GRAY: If you start with, I
want you to do these things,
there's not going to be such
a payoff because you're not
really in estrogen land yet.
If you can share your
feelings, a man penetrates.
See, listening is the most
masculine thing a man can do.
He penetrates into you
deep on an emotional level.
And you're opening the
door for him to come in.
It's literally emotional sex.
And then that opens you up to
produce the hormones where,
when you have sex, it'll
be more fulfilling for you,
which then makes him more
motivated to do things for you.
Which is then the
advanced course.
If you have a nice
orgasm and you're in bed
and you're lying together
and he feels like Superman,
then you say, oh,
honey, tomorrow would
you do this for me?
Ask for more when he
feels like Superman
and he will always say yes.
>>LISA: Brilliant, brilliant.
I love it.
Let's try that.
That's great.
I'm really, really glad that
you said step four because it's
a great piece of advice.
It's not instinctual.
The instinctual part
is, can you do this,
can you do this,
can you do this?
Without the can you, when you
have a second, listen to me?
>>GRAY: Well, I'll give
you even a subtle touch.
Never say to a man "can you?"
Because his immediate
reaction is, of course, I can.
Are you wanting me to?
Are you asking me to?
See, we want to hear the
request because we know there's
a reward for the request.
See, if you say, honey, can
you pick up the kids at school
today?
My first reaction is,
sure, I can do that.
Is that something that
will make your life better?
But if you say honey, would you
pick the kids up from school
today, it's now a
vulnerable place
you're coming from--
more vulnerable.
Would you pick up the kids?
And I go, no, I'm too busy,
it's going to affect you.
But if you say could
you pick up the kids
and I say, no, I can't do
it today, I'm really busy,
it doesn't affect you.
So it's really a protection
from feeling vulnerable.
When you make a request,
"I really like this, would
you do that?"
As opposed to "could you do it?"
"Could you" is just closing
up your vulnerability.
>>LISA: So I'd
really like to take
some extra time for myself.
Could you please
pick up the kids?
That's the way to say it?
>>GRAY: Even "could you please,"
forget about the "coulds."
Just try to take could
out of your vocab.
It's a subtle distinction, but
many men will relate to this.
It's "would you
pick up the kids?"
And you don't have to emphasize,
I really, really need this.
Just say I need to
rest today, would you
pick up the kids today?
When you say it that way,
there's an assumption
that of course he'll want to
do that because he loves you.
>>LISA: So on the
way home from work,
would you pick up an extra
pound of butter or something.
>>GRAY: Yeah.
>>LISA: You can say that.
Oh, it'd be great.
And expect, in the beginning--
because this is a new art
of asking--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: --he's going to forget.
So the third point with the
art of asking, and that's
in my "Men are from Mars"
book, a whole chapter on it,
and the more recent ones.
But if you ask a
man and he's not
used to getting
rewards for things,
he will forget them because
they're little things.
Would you pick up the milk?
I'm not really a milk man, so
I'm not going to remember that.
So when he forgets, you
just don't say anything.
The next day, you
say, oh, by the way,
when you get home from
work, on the way home,
would you pick up the milk?
He will immediately
remember, oh, my gosh,
she asked me before
and I forgot to do it,
and she's not giving
me a hard time.
So he's going to go,
oh, I'm really going
to try to pick up the milk.
But he'll forget one more time.
And then this time when he
forgets and he comes home
and you say, oh, honey,
did you get the milk?
He goes, oh, I forgot.
Oh, I forgot.
He'll feel like, I'm not
going to forget again,
and now you've got
a guy wanting harder
to remember the things you ask.
>>LISA: As long as
she doesn't get mad.
>>GRAY: As long as
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: As long as she doesn't
get disappointed with him,
as long as she's not
disapproving of him.
As long as she doesn't go into,
I knew it, I can't trust you.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: You trust he's
going to do his best.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GRAY: But this is a
guy-- maybe he's a plumber
or maybe he's a
investor, whatever.
He's not a milk man.
That's not what he's been
conditioned to do his life,
to remember to bring milk.
>>LISA: So you just ask
for something you really
don't need.
Don't expect it and you
won't be disappointed.
And then when you finally--
>>GRAY: When you say--
when you ask for something
you don't really need,
let's define need.
If I bring home the
milk, it actually
makes her life a little easier.
That's what you want,
is to make requests
for things that make your life
a little more easy until he gets
into the mode of
doing things for you,
knowing he's going to
get this sweet reward.
See, we're trained
as men, big things.
If you really need it,
the house is burning down,
then we get up and go.
But if it's just a
little thing, we forget.
We want to train a man,
little things get as much love
as big things.
And now, all of a
sudden, you've got
a lasting romantic relationship
where he's giving you
a little affection,
he's complimenting you,
he's looking you in the eyes.
These are little
things and women need
them to keep bumping
up the oxytocin that
will lower the testosterone
and bring her back to estrogen
or progesterone, which
is the hormones she
needs for well-being.
>>LISA: What about
the mind reading?
Like, he should have
brought me flowers?
It would have been so
nice if he would have just
brought me flow-- he should
have opened the door?
Why didn't he pay for dinner?
What about those mind-reads
that we would like to see?
They got edited out a
long time ago, right?
>>GRAY: Well, mind
reading is awful.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: OK, you have to see
how you're keeping yourself
from feeling love.
But then you feel powerless.
I'll tell you how Bonnie
got me to bring flowers.
This is a funny story.
After a year of marriage,
I stopped bringing flowers.
So one day, I'm going
out the house to work
and there was a vase
right by the door.
And I looked at it
and then walked out.
Then the next day, there
were three vases by the door.
I thought, what is that?
The next day, there
were 12 vases.
She even borrowed
vases from neighbors.
And I'm like, honey, what
are these vases doing here?
And she goes, John, what
do you put in vases?
OK, so that was
cute indirectness.
>>LISA: It's great.
>>GRAY: But what
we have to realize
is, as we become
more mature, it's
important to be
specific and direct.
And so we had a conversation.
I said to her, well, honey, if
you want flowers, why don't you
just buy them?
She set me straight.
She says, John, it's not
romantic if I buy them.
It's the thought.
If you remember to
bring the flowers,
it makes me feel special.
It's sweet.
And if I have to ask for
it, it's not as special.
That taught me to do this.
Bonnie would say to me, on
Monday, she'd say, John,
I'm getting my hair
done this Thursday.
Now, my first reaction
is, who cares?
[LAUGHTER]
Then I figured it out.
Why does she tell me that?
Oh, she's giving me warning
so that when she comes home,
I notice.
>>LISA: And you say something.
>>GRAY: I say something.
Because if she has to say,
what do you think of my hair,
it's not as exciting
as opposed to me,
oh, you got your haircut.
It looks great.
It makes a bigger impact.
At the same time, it
makes a bigger impact,
but if a man doesn't
do it, it's not
because he doesn't love you.
It's he's not educated.
So you have to take
this step forward
to educate him with a little
request, which is, honey,
when I come home from
getting my hair cut,
I want you to notice and
say how beautiful I look.
And then forget it.
And then it goes
into the computer
so he can start learning.
Because men, we
don't consciously
think that's so important.
But to me-- like
when I give a talk
and I get a standing ovation
and I don't have to ask for it,
it's 1,000 times more
than if I worked for it.
And every performer knows how
to get a standing ovation.
You can set it up and
do this, but I refuse to
so that when I do it, it
was really unsolicited.
It just came.
I hold that in my mind.
What Bonnie wants is for
me to do these things
without her having to ask.
But at the same time, if
you're not getting it, women,
you have to start asking till
he learns to do those things.
>>LISA: You had a 35-year
incredible relationship
with Bonnie, and it was a
monogamous relationship.
You didn't have an open
relationship, right?
>>GRAY: No, no.
>>LISA: But you had magic
in that relationship, right?
>>GRAY: Yes, and we still have
the magic, but she's not here.
>>LISA: She's not here.
>>GRAY: Physically.
>>LISA: Yeah, she is
in spirit now with us.
>>GRAY: Yeah.
And we wanted to
dedicate this show to her
because she has been such a
huge influence on our lives.
She's inspired the greatest
relationship book of all time.
And we put together a
little in memoriam--
a beautiful piece here
for you to just take
a look at this show that's
being honored in Bonnie's name.
Take a look.
>>GRAY: Thank you.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> Happy anniversary, John.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GRAY: I love you, Bonnie.
>>LISA: We love you, Bonnie.
>>GRAY: We miss you so much.
>>LISA: She is here with us.
>>GRAY: She's with
us, she's with us.
And I just want to acknowledge
my book should have
said by Bonnie and John Gray.
She's a piece of every
page in that book.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAY: And all
the work I've done.
And since she's
passed, I can't even
imagine how I could come close
to what I've done in this world
without her.
She was always there for me,
supporting me in this journey.
>>LISA: She's one of
your greatest gifts.
>>GRAY: She is.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAY: Yeah.
>>LISA: And the gift
that keeps on giving.
Even watching that, you
see the spirit that she is
and it just lifts
off the screen.
So thank you for
sharing her with us,
and thank you for sharing
your wisdom with us
in this incredible show.
Thanks, John.
I love you.
>>GRAY: Thank you, Lisa.
I love you, too.
>>LISA: And thank you so much
for watching this show as well.
If you'd like to watch great,
more inspirational shows, just
go to "Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr, and I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]